Welcome to the lecture on residuals and
residual variation.
My name is Brian Caffo,
and I'm the instructor for
the regression class as part of
the Data Science Coursera Specialization.
Let's start by talking about
our motivating example
using the diamond data set.
Remember, in this data set the diamonds
were diamond prices in Singapore dollars.
And, the diamond, the explanatory variable
is the weight of the diamond in carats.
We'd like to talk about how we can
explain variation in diamond prices
using their mass.
Let me generate a plot.
Last time, I showed, went through
the commands for generating the plot, so
I won't do this again.
But, here's my ggplot,
and let me zoom out.
So, what we're interested
now Is explaining
price on the vertical axis by
mass on the horizontal axis.
If we had disregarded mass,
we would have all these points.
We would look at their sort of
projection onto the vertical axis.
And there would be a lot of variation.
Dis, if you were to disregard mass,
there would be a lot of variation.
When we consider mass,
there's much less variation.
because, now we are talking about this
variation around the regression line.
The variation around the regression line,
is residual variation.
That variation that was left unexplained
by having accounted for mass.
So, we start out with a lot of variation.
We've explained a substantial fraction of
it by the linear relationship with mass,
but there's some left over variation.
We'll call that residual variation.
These distances that make up the residual
variation are called the residuals, and
that's the topic of today's lecture.
The residuals are quite useful for
diagnosing many things,
including poor model fit.
Let's remind ourselves of
the model that we're considering.
Our outcome and our example,
which would be price,
is Yi, which we're assuming is a line.
Beta nought plus Beta Xi, where Xi,
in this case, is mass in our example.
We're adding on some gaussian error,
epsolon i, which we're assuming to be
normally distributed with a mean of
zero and a variance of sigma squared.
We haven't explicitly used
this normal assumption yet,
and that'll be coming later,
later on in some subsequent lectures.
Remember, the outcome is Yi for predictor
value, Xi at that specific index i.
So, Yi is a price, Xi is a mass.
The point on the line
corresponding to Xi is Yi hat.
We can figure out Yi hat just by plugging
in Beta0 hat plus Beta1 hat times Xi.
Well, our residual is nothing other
than the vertical distance between
the observed data point, observed outcome,
Yi, and the fitted value, Yi hat.
So, ei is equal to Yi minus Yi hat.
Remember, our least square's criteria
tried to minimize the sum of the squared
vertical distances.
So in essence, it was minimizing
the sum of the squared residual,
summation ei squared.
One way to think about the residuals
are as an estimate of epsilon i.
Though, you have to be careful with that,
because as we'll see later on, we can
decrease the residuals just by adding
irrelevant regressors into the equation.
Let's talk about some aspects of residuals
that will help us interpret them.
First of all, their population
is expected value is zero.
But also, their sum, their empirical sum,
hence the empirical mean also,
is zero if you include an intercept.
If you don't include an intercept,
this property doesn't have to hold.
Well, the generalization of this property
is, if you include any regression term in,
in linear regression,
in our generalization in linear models,
the sum of the residuals times that
regression variable has to be zero.
Residuals are very useful for
diagnosing poor model fit.
And, we can create plots
that sort of highlight and
zone in on the aspects of poor model fit.
Another common use of residuals is to
think of them as the outcome Y with
the linear influence of
the predictor X having been removed.
So, for example, if we wanted
to in some subsequent model or
some subsequent analysis diamond prices,
but in a way that has already
been adjusted for their weight.
So, calibrating all the diamond
prices to sort of be on the same
scale regardless of their weight.
We would take those
residuals from the model
fit that has diamond prices as
the outcome, and weight as the predictor.
So, it's very common to take residuals and
carry them forward in a later analysis
where you want to think of them as the,
the new outcome, having removed
the predictor at that point.
But, of course, remember,
you're only if you do linear regression,
you're only only removing the linear
component of the predictor.
So, one should differentiate
between residual variation,
which is variation that is left over
after the explanatory variable has
been accounted for in a linear fashion,
from systematic variation,
which is variation explained
by the regression model.
So again, residual plots can
highlight poor model fit.
And, we are going to go through
some residual plots here in
just a couple of slides